---
title: Being a Politician
layout: page
---

Being a Politician
----------------------
{:.no_toc}

Sometimes it is not clear what our elected representatives do or why
they are necessary. This page offers some insight into these
questions. We reached out to some sitting and former politicians and
asked them about their experiences.

Some of the politicians we contacted offered individual accounts they
had put together in the past:

- School trustee Ted Martin [on being a
  trustee](./ted-martin-on-being-a-trustee)
- Kitchener ward Councillor Sarah Marsh [podcast
  interview](https://soundcloud.com/theglobalshuffle/city-councillor-sarah-marsh-learnings-in-the-nonpartisan-level-of-govt)

If you have other accounts, or if you are/were a sitting politician
and would like to add your experiences, contact us.

* table of contents
{:toc}

### Why do politicians run for office?

Some people are tapped on the shoulder. They participate in municipal
government in other ways (as staff, or on citizen's committees) and
other people ask them to run.

Some people are inspired to run by civic engagement groups. In this
election, several candidates ran after attending the [Waterloo Region
Women's Municipal Campaign School](https://learnhowtorun.com)
workshops.

Some people become politically actve because a municipal issue affects
them personally.

Many people are driven to run for office out of a sense of public
service.

### What do politicians find rewarding about the office?


### What do politicians find challenging?

Serving as an elected official means balancing competing interests,
and the nature of the job means that politicians cannot please
everybody. 

### What do they do? What responsibilities do they have?

It depends on the position. In general elected officials set direction
and policies, while non-elected staff figure out the details and
implement the policies. 

Many elected officials also manage budgets. 

Regional and area municipal politicians sit on various steering
committees within their level of government.

Almost all muncipal politicians and school board trustees interact
with the public and address their concerns. 

### Is being a municipal politician a full-time job?

Mayoral positions in the three cities are considered full-time jobs,
as-is the Regional Chair. Other positions are not. Many elected
officials hold other jobs in addition to their offices. 

For context, [according to the New Hamburg
Independent](https://www.newhamburgindependent.ca/news-story/7767503-wilmot-increases-council-salaries-to-keep-them-the-same) 
the Mayor of Wilmot earned $28 222, and ward councillors earned $14
112. 


### What do politicians wish voters understood about their jobs?

Some elected officials wish residents understood that politicians are
regular people carrying out public service. 
