---
title: Cambridge Referendum on Ranked Ballots
---

Cambridge Referendum on Ranked Ballots 
--------------------------------------
{:.no_toc}

* table of contents
{:toc}

### What is even happening?

In addition to electing candidates, voters in Cambridge will be asked
to vote on the following referendum question: 

<p class="bigtext">"Are you in favour of the City of Cambridge using a
ranked ballot system for the 2022 municipal election?"</p>

There is more information about the referendum and
ranked ballots on the [City of Cambridge Ranked
Ballot](https://www.cambridge.ca/en/learn-about/ranked-ballot-voting.aspx)
page. 

You can find general information about municipality adoption of ranked
ballots here: Ontario Ministry of Municipal
Affairs and Housing [Ranked Ballot FAQ
page](http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page11122.aspx). 


### What is a ranked ballot? 

Under the system we use now, you indicate one candidate for each
position that is to be filled. For example, there is one mayor in
Wilmot, so you would indicate your preferred nominee, and the nominee
with the most votes win. Similarly, there are two available ward
councillor seats for Wilmot Ward 4, so you would indicate up to two
nominees there. Then the two nominees with the highest number of votes
win the two seats.

In a ranked ballot, you may indicate more than one candidate even if
there is only one position to be filled. You do this by ranking
candidates, from your most preferred to the last one you would
tolerate. You must give every candidate a different ranking, but you
may rank as many or as few candidates as you wish. This works the same
regardless of whether there is one or many positions to be filled. 

There are then different mechanisms to award seats to nominees based
upon these rankings. You can see [a
demonstration](http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page11118.aspx) of how votes
would be counted on the Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing site.


### What happens if the referendum passes?

If the referendum passes then the City of Cambridge will transtion to
ranked ballots for its mayoral and municipal ward positions, in time
for the 2022 election.

The referendum only applies to races for the city of Cambridge --
namely, the mayor and city councillors. All other positions (Regional
Chair, Cambridge representatives on Regional Council, and school board
trustees) will continue to be elected using the existing system. 


### What happens if the referendum does not pass?

If the referendum does not pass then the voting system in Cambridge
remains the same.  

### Under what conditions does the referendum pass?

In order for the referendum to pass, the voter turnout for the
referendum must exceed 50%, **and** a majority of those casting
ballots in the referendum
must vote yes. 

For context, in 2014 the voter turnout in Cambridge [was 29.89
percent](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/kitchener-waterloo/voter-turnout-in-waterloo-region-stagnant-overall-1.2815625). 
Regardless of how many voters choose to support ranked ballots in the
referendum, if the voter turnout is less than 50%, the referendum
fails. City officials might take the results into account, but are not
obligated to.

For more information, see the [Questions on the
Ballot](http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page18734.aspx#questions) section of
the Ontario 2018 Voters' Guide.


### Who is campaigning for and against this referendum?

The only officially registered third-party is Yes! Cambridge. They
have a Twitter account here:
[@yescambridge](https://twitter.com/yescambridge).

There is also an anonymous Twitter account
[@RankedBallotWR](https://twitter.com/RankedBallotWR) that seems to be
promoting the referendum. 

So far there appear to be no organized groups opposing the referendum.
If you find some please contact us so we can update this FAQ.
