---
title: "Ted Martin: On Being a Trustee"
---

Ted Martin: On Being a Trustee
------------------------------

Waterloo Region District School Board trustee Ted Martin
gave us permission to republish the text of a speech he gave in 2014.
It is a good overview of what motivated Martin to become a trustee and
what the job entails.


**Past Chairperson Ted Martin, panel member at December 4, 2014
Leadership Academy**

I have decided to take the approach of sharing with you my personal
journey as a trustee rather than simply going through the legislated
responsibilities.

I became involved with school board politics in 1996-97, when my
eldest daughter had just enrolled in the public education system, and
parents around the province were joining together to express concerns
about the educational direction being taken by the provincial
government of the day, in particular Bill 160.

In Toronto, Annie Kidder and others formed People for Education.
Another group developed in Ottawa, an alternate group in Toronto. In
Waterloo Region, we formed a group called PACE (Parents Against Cuts
to Education, though we later changed it to People Against Cuts to
Education, to be more inclusive).

When the 1997 municipal elections rolled around, we put my name on the
ballot for trustee and I was elected in Kitchener, finishing in third
spot of about fourteen candidates, behind two incumbents.

As a new trustee, I soon discovered that most of the things I had
campaigned on and most of the things I had hoped to change or
challenge, were outside the realm of what Trustees could do.

And, in subsequent years, under subsequent governments, that realm has
continued to shrink.

Perhaps a good place to start is with a reminder that trustees are not
members of a parliament. 

During my first year, I often spent much of my energy asking pointed
questions to staff. After one particularly heated exchange, during
which I had made our Manager of Information Technology look
incompetent, someone from the audience – the head of the male
elementary teachers association – took me aside and said, “those are
really good questions you are asking, important questions, but you
have to remember that this is not Queen’s Park, that the staff is not
the government and you are not the opposition.”

I think that was an important lesson for me. Because, while we want to
hold staff responsible for implementing the decisions of the Board,
our ultimate goal – unlike in a parliamentary setting – is not to
score political points or play to our constituents, but to create an
education system that works for our students, that promotes student
achievement and well-being, and to build public confidence in public
education.

Trustees are members of a board, which is quite a different thing than
being politicians. Many of you may have served on community boards –
I’ve been on non-profit sport or church boards – and a school board
should be more like them or like the Board of a corporation than like
a government body.

Individual trustees have absolutely no power – but together, as a
Board, we govern the school system by hiring the Director, setting the
policies, and, at least theoretically, allocating the resources.

I say theoretically because the Ministry determines where most of our
resources must be allocated and how much money we receive – local
Boards do not have the ability to tax.

It is almost amusing when members of the public threaten us – usually
during a boundary or accommodation review – that they will switch
their taxes to the Catholic board if we don’t support their position:
it really doesn’t matter which board you designate your taxes to,
since all Boards are funded by the Ministry of Education using a
formula largely based on the number of students. There are some extra
grants for special needs, English as a Second Language,
transportation, and so on, so the allocation isn’t exactly equal based
on the number of students, but it is meant to be equitable.

Boards do make budgetary decisions about school maintenance and
repairs, about the allocation of some staff (such as educational
assistants), about the implementation of special / magnet programs
(such as French Immersion), about the allocation of technology and so
on, but usually almost the entire budget is already committed and we
are dealing with minor details and, ideally, even those are largely
determined by the policies we have established.

For example, we shouldn’t have to decide about individual allocations
of educational assistants or French Immersion classes, since we have
Policies to govern that.

Which brings us to probably the primary role of the Board of Trustees:
to establish the vision and policies of the Board, and to provide
oversight to ensure that they are being implemented.

It is important to differentiate between Policies – which the Board
establishes – and Procedures – which Staff develops as a way to
implement the Policies.

Trustees are explicitly forbidden, by provincial directive, from
getting involved in the day-to-day operations of the school board.

So, last winter, when staff responded to the Labour Board’s directive
about helmets being worn by staff during ice skating activities, they
could look to our safety policies – for both staff and students – and
implement a procedure in keeping with those policies, without
consulting with trustees, although I will assure you that they kept us
informed about what was happening.

Let’s look at Board Policy 2005, which is titled Parent Support.

The Policy consists of but two paragraphs: one that recognizes that
parents or guardians of students may feel they need support in some
cases and the other explaining that *Trustees will facilitate the
communication process between the parent and the appropriate staff and
provide information and direction. Trustees shall direct the parent or
guardian to the processes that should be followed in resolving any
concerns or to the appropriate person or step in the process, but
shall not act as a representative of the parent or guardian.*

Administrative Procedure 1410, also titled Parent Support, is the
staff procedure developed to implement Board Policy 2005. It is two
pages long and goes into much more detail about the Steps in
Communicating with Schools, about who and what is a Representative of
a Parent, about Matters that should not be addressed at a Meeting
between Staff and Parents, and so on.

Not only does this example show the difference between Policy – the
high-level statement of guiding principles developed by trustees – and
Procedure, which describes how the policies are to be implemented by
staff, it also speaks to the role of trustee as advocate.

While trustees are to consider the needs of the local community and
the opinions and positions of community members when making decisions
around the Board table, trustees must ultimately make decisions that
they feel are best for the entire system, which means often deciding
contrary to what particular individuals may have shared.

So trustees should never resist being ombuds people, helping members
of the public navigate their way through the system, as Board Policy
2005 and Administrative Procedure 1410 show, but we should never
become advocates for a particular person or a particular cause.

If I ultimately arrive at a position that is contrary to their
position, despite having consulted with them on the issue at hand,
parents will often complain that I didn’t listen to them. I think they
are confusing having their say with getting their way.

But, while a parent understandably is taking the position that he or
she feels is best for his or her child, the trustee must consider all
the inputs – often in diametrical opposition to one another – and make
a decision that the trustee feels is best for the entire system, under
whatever constraints the province and labour agreements have placed
upon us.

How many people do we have here? I bet if I asked you each for your
thoughts on a particularly contentious issue, perhaps bell times, I
would get at least 10 different answers, and some of them would be
completely opposite of each other.

Trustees need to weigh all that input, plus input from staff, from the
Ministry, maybe from other School Boards, and our own knowledge and
experience, and make the best decision possible.

This may not be a popular decision and we sometimes struggle with
making difficult decisions, but it is the design of representative
democracy that we elect people to make the best decisions on our
behalf not merely to make the most convenient decisions or even the
most popular decisions.

And trustees should always be careful about how strenuously or
personally they hold to a particular position – and I know I’ve gone
too far on some things, because, once the Board makes a decision, each
trustee is required by law to uphold the decision of the Board, even
if they did not support that position.

So even if I argued against a motion and voted against it, and argued
vehemently and passionately against it, I am required to uphold the
implementation of the resolution passed by the Board and must be able
to explain the rationale for the policy, and ensure that it is
understood, implemented and monitored.

The most extreme example of this for me was when I was the Chairperson
of the Board, back in 2003, when we discussed and debated the closing
of high schools for over a year. In the end, we voted to close a high
school by a 6-5 vote and I was on the losing side. Nevertheless, I was
required to go before the media – to be the spokesperson— to explain
why we decided to do what we decided to do – even though I personally
voted against that decision. Some neighbours left very nasty messages
on my voice mail, but I was obligated to explain the corporate
decision of the Board, because, as a trustee, I am merely a member of
the Board and must support and adhere to the decisions of the Board.

For those of us who are driven to become trustees – it is usually
because of some deeply held beliefs or things we strongly believe need
changing and we are likely type A personalities –this can be extremely
difficult.

I think I’ve mentioned – even if just in passing – most of the primary
roles of a trustee. So, to summarize, in the order that I’ve mentioned
them, rather than in any sort of priority or how they are listed in
the Education Act or other government-endorsed documentation:

- Fostering a system that promotes student achievement and well-being

- Building public confidence in public education

- Hiring a Director of Education and holding the director responsible
  for the performance of all the staff because the Director is really
  the only employee of the Board of Trustees

- Setting the Vision and Policies of the Board, being able to explain
  the decisions of the Board, and overseeing their implementation by
  the staff

- Allocating resources through the budget process, which includes a
  legislated responsibility to pass a balanced budget

- Deciding on the recommendations from school boundary and
  accommodation reviews

- Engaging in two-way communication with members of the public

- Assisting people who have a complaint or an issue navigate their way
  through the system

- Leaving the day-to-day operations to the hired staff

But I did want to conclude with something that has become more and
more obvious and important to me over the years as a trustee.

When I was reading a list of the attributes of an effective school
board, in the Good Governance document, chapter four, which is about
the role of trustees, and noticed that, along with things like “making
informed decisions,” which seems obvious as central to what would make
an effective board, it highlighted “working together as a team.”

I’ve been a youth soccer and hockey coach since my first year of
university, and have coached school-aged girls in hockey for over 15
years. Without exception, the most successful and most satisfying
seasons have been when the girls (and their parents) came together as
a team.

The ideal team is one on which the individual players combine their
own unique skills and efforts with the effort and unique skills of
their teammates to achieve a success greater than the sum of the
parts.

But sometimes, the best players – the ones who draw the crowd’s
applause, the ones who put on the best show, who show the most
technical skill – are not the most valuable players on the team
because they have chosen to function outside the team strategy, more
concerned about individual accomplishments than team goals. When the
most technically skilled players do that, the team is seldom
successful and the season is seldom satisfying for anyone – players,
parents or coaches.

Similarly, sometimes the trustee who gets the most media coverage or
even garners the most community support is not the trustee who is best
helping the Board be effective, because he or she is not working with
the other trustees as a team.

Because being Trustees really is a team sport. 

So I would add another role for trustees to that list we developed
throughout this presentation – being a team player: working with the
other trustees to accomplish all the other things we mentioned
earlier.

